Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, given that there are a number of questions on the impact of the financial crisis on European industry, I will, if there are no objections, answer them in one fell swoop. I will begin with the questions on the general impact of the crisis and then move on to answer those that refer specifically to the steel sector.
Last year's downturn in the world economic climate undoubtedly had a negative impact on the European Union.
However, in 1998, good internal conditions more than compensated for negative external effects.
The growth of the 15 Member States in 1998 was 0.1 % higher than predicted in March 1998.
The economic crisis will mean losses for the European Union's economy in 1999. However, its effects should, in principle, be limited thanks to the introduction of the euro, as Mrs Miranda just mentioned, and by maintaining healthy economic conditions.
The Commission trusts that Europe's economy will recover in the year 2000, a year in which it is hoped growth will reach 2.8 %.
In that general context, some sectors of European industry are faced with fierce competition from imports.
There has been an increase in imports from South-East Asia and other regions. But exports have also increased in all sectors, despite the drop in exports to South-East Asia.
In the year leading up to September 1998, the European Union registered a trade surplus of ECU 22 billion for industrial products, that is, ECU 16 billion less than the surplus for the same period in 1997. The significant devaluations of South-East Asian currencies have damaged the competitiveness of short-term European prices.
However, this has been partially compensated for by the high national inflation rates in those countries.
It is difficult to predict what the final impact of the crisis in South-East Asia will be in terms of the EU's relative competitive position.
It is particularly difficult due to the fact that the fluctuations in South-East Asian exchange rates can have repercussions on the countries' commercial output and competitiveness. As a result, it is difficult to give a prognosis at this stage.
Clearly, the Commission is concerned about the implications of an increase in competitive pressure on European industry.
This heavy pressure will probably continue in 1999, although perhaps not at such high levels as in 1998.
The European Union's trade balance for industrial products should improve in relation to 1998.
Although we do not yet have data for the 1998 period, the Commission calculates that the direct repercussions are marginal in terms of total industrial output for that year, but that they could be more significant in 1999.
When the Commission made its autumn forecast, it pointed out that it expected growth in employment to reach 1.2 % in 1998, a more rapid rate of growth than the 0.8 % rate recorded in spring.
However, the slower growth of gross domestic product in 1999 will also be accompanied by a drop in the employment growth rate to 0.9 %.
Nonetheless, it is hoped that unemployment will continue to decrease.
It should have dropped to 10 % in 1998 and should then drop to 9.5 % in 1999, from a maximum of 11.2 % recorded in 1994.
As regards the increase in competitive pressure on European industry, this does not necessarily mean that the Union's trading partners are using unfair trade practices.
The Commission is prepared to apply the instruments of the Union's commercial policy where conditions dictate and in accordance with the relevant WTO agreements.
To illustrate this point, only last week the Commission initiated two proceedings, based on two complaints submitted by the European Union's steel industry. The first relates to dumping concerning hot-rolled strips from Bulgaria, Iran, Yugoslavia, India, Taiwan and South Africa.
The second is a complaint against subsidies for the same products from India, Taiwan and South Africa. None of the countries mentioned in the anti-dumping or anti-subsidy cases are South-East Asian countries implementing IMF stabilisation programmes.
The Commission is not aware of unfair trade practices relating to imports of steel products into the Community, except for the cases it is already dealing with.
During 1998, until the month of September, imports of finished or semi-finished steel products rose to 18.5 million tonnes, 6.6 million tonnes more than for the corresponding period in 1997.
At the same time, exports dropped by 2.7 million tonnes to 18.3 million tonnes.
As a result, the European Union showed a trade deficit of 0.2 million tonnes compared with a surplus of 9.2 million tonnes for the previous year.
The unexpected increase in imports of steel products into the European Union caused prices to collapse in the second half of 1998.
Demand for steel from the manufacturing industry is expected to fall in the first half of 1999, but is later expected to improve, leading to total annual results similar to those of previous years.
In 1999, the level of imports is expected to remain high.
It is difficult for the Commission to estimate to what extent the South-East Asian steel industry will contribute to economic recovery in the region, given that it varies from country to country.
Nonetheless, it is clear that several countries in the region significantly increased their revenue from steel products in 1998.
This was the case for South Korea, Taiwan, Japan, China and Indonesia, amongst other countries.
During the United States-European Union Summit, held in Washington on 18 December 1998, debates were held on a wide variety of issues and one of these related to imports of steel products.
The Commission highlighted the need to keep markets open and to avoid delaying the recovery of those countries hit by the crisis that were carrying out IMF stabilisation programmes.
It is essential that all parties involved act in a responsible manner and in accordance with international standards in order to safeguard the advantages of trade liberalisation and avoid further trade disputes.
The United States administration, for its part, is aware that imposing trade barriers would harm countries that have been seriously affected by economic problems. But it is also facing strong internal pressure to react to the recent fluctuations in steel imports.
There is a possibility that the United States may adopt commercial measures on steel imports in the coming months.
The Commission will follow any developments closely to ensure that the United States acts in accordance with international trade standards.
I would now briefly like to refer to two questions that have been raised.
The first is from Mrs Miranda de Lage on the impact of the Asian crisis on the shipbuilding industry.
Following the devaluation of various currencies in South-East Asia, the Koreans, in particular, have enjoyed higher sales in this sector.
However, the Community industry managed to maintain a strong position in the world market in 1998: it obtained 29 % of new orders between January and September 1998, as opposed to 22 % for Korea.
As I said earlier, the Commission is watching closely to ensure that the countries involved in the crisis respect the conditions laid down by the International Monetary Fund and, more specifically, the conditions relating to structural reforms and the relations between industry and the Korean Government.
I should now like to say a few words on the impact of recent events in Brazil on European industry.
I believe that, at this stage, it is still difficult to give a correct diagnosis, and would, in fact, be rather hasty.
A great deal will depend on how the financial markets react to the events in Brazil.
Here we have - as you will also have - the latest news to reach us on how the markets reacted and on the packet of urgent measures put forward by the Brazilian Congress.
These were part of the fiscal reforms demanded by the International Monetary Fund, in exchange for aid amounting to USD 42 billion.
These measures form part of the restructuring plan being pursued by President Fernando Cardoso.
The Managing Director of the IMF, Michel Camdessus, yesterday stated that he was satisfied with Brazil's commitment to apply the budgetary consolidation programme agreed with the IMF. At the same time, the Brazilian President has continued to send out messages of confidence to investors.
In any event, the European Union and Brazil have important trade links and European businesses have invested quite substantially in industrial development in Brazil, in the automobile sector for example.
The European Union imports a large quantity of raw materials from Brazil and the devaluation of the real could obviously force down the prices of these products, with some positive implications for European industry.
However, the devaluation might increase the competitiveness of Brazilian exports to the European Union and reduce the competitiveness of the European industry's exports to Brazil.
These are just a few comments I wanted to make on the situation currently unfolding. There is still a need for caution in a situation such as this as we do not know how the financial markets will behave over the days and weeks to come.
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, of course the successful introduction of the single currency justifies greater confidence on the part of the Union, and nobody wants to be a herald of pessimism at a time like this.
I also believe, however, that we all know the success of Europe's economy will be judged not so much in monetary terms but in relation to the real economy, and there the situation is not at all encouraging.
Unemployment, the supposedly number one economic problem, which I fear we are making zero effort to address, has stabilised despite all your forecasts - for what you told us, Commissioner, amounts to no more than forecasts - at around 10.5 %, and even if it falls by 0.5 % that is not very much.
We have long forgotten the optimistic words spoken by Mr Delors in this Chamber at the beginning of our parliamentary term, about the creation of 15 million new jobs which would reduce unemployment to 6 or 7 %.
The prospective growth rate of Europe's economy in 1999 has fallen to just 1.4 %.
The money market crisis in the third world, which has of course become a crisis of the real economy there, has brought about huge job losses, reductions in real incomes and a fall of our own exports.
It is a fact that any development comes from the services sector in our own area and in the United States, while in contrast, in the manufacturing industry, there are already clear signs of surplus production capacity.
In the face of such a situation, it is not surprising that voices have been raised in favour of protectionism.
And what you told us about the steel industry verges on a brief protectionist declaration, not by yourself, but one that is increasingly to be heard in major parliaments, in Congress and in other decision-making centres in the world.
This is a very dangerous development, because there is nothing more dangerous than a return to the restrictions on world trade, which would of course affect the weakest economies worst.
Without oversimplifying matters, common sense shows that we must not make such a difficult situation even more difficult by suppressing demand in our own economy by the restrictions we have imposed on financial policy, in other words the celebrated 3 % deficit limit of the Stability Pact.
Besides, it is forecast that in 1999, in the present economic situation, the 3 % limit will not easily be held to by Germany, Italy and France, in other words the big European countries.
Will unemployment have to increase to 25 % before we begin reviewing a restrictive policy which, though it may have reduced inflation to zero, is now moving towards the achievement of zero employment as well?
Commissioner, the question you are being asked deserves relatively general answers that can be found, together with your comments, by reading our daily papers.
I would first of all point out how unwise we were to condemn the instruments that gave us the ECSC Treaty.
At that time, I asked for more care to be taken.
We knew that the crises in the iron and steel industry would reoccur fairly frequently and we now find ourselves very poorly equipped.
It is a little too late for you to tell us that the Commission is going to determine whether or not the United States contravenes the international conventions or international WTO commitments.
As Mr Katiforis has just pointed out, measures have already been taken by the United States, which do not seem, at least at first sight, to comply to any great extent with WTO commitments.
In other words, the Commission seems to be equally at a loss when it tells us that caution is necessary and that the situation is difficult: that is just about all it can tell us.
We should be able to say to the WTO that changes in the exchange rate are in some respects similar to duties or customs duties.
What difference is there between imposing a customs duty on imports and devaluing the currency in a competitive manner? There is something amiss there.
Rather, the emphasis should be placed more on the stabilisation of exchange rates and we should positively adopt the approaches that Japan and some of our countries have already taken.
In my opinion, we should either improve the stability of exchange rates or at least ensure that we still have the resources to protect ourselves like other countries.
Madam President, three large volcanoes have just erupted: one in Asia, one in Russia, and one in Latin America.
The next volcano is already showing signs of erupting.
That is China.
The problem is that capitalism, with its capital markets, creates instability and imbalance in the world.
Today's capital markets are hyperinflated.
Any concept of inflation worth its salt must take account of the fact that capital markets mean the unrestricted rise in value of capital goods.
International institutions issue erroneous advice when this situation occurs.
They give the same kind of advice to all countries, which are all different, and generally that advice is deflation, or, in the case of industrialised countries, cuts in social welfare.
These institutions, under the leadership of the IMF, do not prevent the forest fires from starting: they only light other fires to counter the problem, but that is not enough.
We should be preventing the fire, or, in this case, the volcanic eruptions, from starting at all.
In this situation the left has a real opportunity.
Real capitalism causes problems, so let us make a joint assessment of the situation and work according to that.
The third way is the outside lane.
We must now together find the second way for the left and the Greens.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, we must not keep on protesting that things are not really all that bad, as is always the case in short-time crisis management. Instead, we need to develop strategies, at the core of which must be, not moralistic advice, but well-understood self-interest.
The very real danger of a deflationary process which can no longer be controlled is moving ever closer.
Assurances that there is really no problem ring ever more hollow.
We must realise that long-term stabilisation of the global financial architecture is impossible without the stabilisation of the economy in global terms, and that this will not come about without the stabilisation of the global social order. In other words, the question is not: how do we arrive at an alternative global economic and social order?
This would be illusory. Instead, the old Keynesian questions - not his answers - are becoming once again very pressing.
How do we achieve a global payment system that functions well and remains stable in the face of short-term irritations and volatility?
How do we achieve a global monetary policy?
How do we construct an international trade organisation that is in a position to stabilise commodity prices?
How do we achieve aid programmes with low-cost loans and subsidies to assist developing countries? And now that we are faced with globalisation it is no longer just a question of developing countries but also sectors, projects and industries.
The present discussion is too narrowly focused on the imposition of antidumping and antisubsidising measures, which in effect means denying certain countries the opportunity to develop.
The question must be posed differently: how is it in fact possible to solve the problem of actual demand, which is currently not being met, in terms of the value of money?
As an example, let us take global shipping.
We have a shipping fleet which is completely outdated, environmentally unsound and unsafe, the renovation of which would bring lasting employment and progress in resource efficiency.
So, instead of continually asking the wrong question about the world economy locomotive, we should be asking ourselves about a joint global investment train; as Europeans, we can make a contribution here and we have a responsibility to do so, a responsibility which we are currently not fulfilling.

Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, today we have a delegation from the US Congress here in the House.
It is apparent to all that our debate is highly topical and that global problems need to be tackled at a global level.
Although the European Parliament can be criticised for perhaps proceeding with considerable caution and deliberation in certain matters, I nevertheless believe that the fundamental criterion for the European Parliament is to produce results and to benefit those who need it.
In this House we have already dealt on a number of occasions with turbulences in the world of international finance.
In Europe we now have the euro, which has brought with it a new stability, at least in the euro zone of the eleven and thus in the European Union as a whole.
Through the single market we have made progress in respect of border tariff problems, and we are also moving in the right direction in the area of subsidies.
That is why I am very grateful to my colleagues in the House for providing the opportunity for us to devote our attention once again to this issue, in particular to the repercussions in Europe.
Entire sectors of industry, such as the pharmaceutical industry, ship building and, above all, the steel industry, are facing new challenges.
Our opportunities for export in these areas have shrunk dramatically.
Exports to Asia, for example, have fallen by 56 %.
By contrast, imports into the single market from this region have risen sharply.
Import escalation rates of up to 700 % are currently being quoted.
For the first time the European Union has become a net importer of steel.
We must work together to reverse this trend, in the interests of those industries affected and of their employees.
In the light of these developments, I am delighted that we can today welcome to Strasbourg a delegation from the United States Congress.
The USA is facing similar, if not quite so far-reaching, challenges.
We can only get to grips with these developments through cooperation, joint strategies and a joint problem-solving approach.
In this way each country will take on its share of the responsibility, but always in relation to the actual burdens and opportunities.
In this context, free access to markets has a crucial role to play.
Trade-policy instruments naturally include antidumping measures and WTO procedures in places where state interference is pushing down the price of exports.
But such measures can only be regarded as a last resort.
In the long term we need constructive transatlantic dialogue because only if we preserve free trade in goods and observe the rules of fair competition on both sides of the Atlantic, will we be able to guarantee a stable global environment.
Madam President, I should firstly like to thank the Commissioner for the information he gave us which, to a certain extent, was rather optimistic. However, it also demonstrates the same concern we have when asking questions.
And those of us who live in regions such as Asturias are concerned. Asturias has already lost more than 6 000 direct jobs in the steel industry, not to mention the indirect job losses that can also be added to this figure.
It is very important to us to prevent further job losses.
This is the Union's main concern at the moment.
Not only must we create employment, but we must also ensure that existing jobs are not lost.
If we do not do so, the employment plans drawn up in all the Member States will be of little use.
In the resolution we have signed there is the suggestion - and I know it is not a very popular one - that we should once again discuss a tax on financial capital transfers in the economies of such countries.
We do not know what might happen in Brazil.
You said so yourself.
We have received this news but we do not know what impact it will have on the European Union's economy.
Nor do we know whether the European Union, in spite of the euro umbrella sheltering us, will be able to weather the storm of serious problems that will affect such extremely important sectors in the future, that is, the steel, shipbuilding and textiles sectors.
This last sector is not included in an amendment by Mr Kittelmann, but we suggest that it be included because it is also extremely important.
Madam President, I will only speak for a minute and I would like to thank everyone who has spoken this morning.
I will very briefly say to Mr Katiforis - whom I cannot see here at the moment - that I in fact believe that it would be a serious mistake at this time of international economic fragility for the European Union to lift protectionist barriers. This could provoke similar responses all over the world and lead us into a global recession that could last for a long time.
I should like to say to Mr Herman - whom I cannot see here either - that the Commission does not believe that the American plan for the steel industry is its last word on the policy it is going to adopt in order to address pressures facing the steel trade. Instead, we believe it is the beginning of a negotiating process with Congress and the steel industry that could lead to specific measures within a few months.
I should also like to say to Mr Herman that the ECSC Treaty still applies.
Our steel industry is bearing up well. The measures that the United States is currently adopting are the same as those being adopted by the European Community, in other words, provisions for applying the instruments of the commercial policy.
In response to some speeches, specifically that by Mr Wolf, I should also like to say that our concern at the current moment is that the countries in crisis come out of it as quickly as possible. This would not only benefit them but would also put them in a position to import European products.
Consequently, I believe that, on the one hand, we must see how well we can survive this situation, and on the other hand, we must help these countries to recover as we will then be able to export to them.
It is well known that the World Trade Organisation does not accept measures against currency devaluations and, until now, the United States and the European Union have not applied any measures in this respect.
Finally, I should like to say to Mr Rübig that we must use the instruments of our commercial policy against unfair practices in imports, that is, the instruments I referred to earlier: the anti-dumping and anti-subsidy instruments.
In any event, I should like to say that I have fully noted all this morning's speeches and I will pass them on to my colleagues in the Commission.
Madam President, in the original resolutions the three sectors of most concern are mentioned: steel, shipbuilding and textiles.
These three sectors are not covered in the joint resolution and I think this is due to a transcription error. However, there is an amendment by Mr Kittelmann that includes the steel and shipbuilding industries.
We have talked to him and with other colleagues about adding the textiles industry, which is important for our country and for others.
If there are no objections, we will approve this amendment by Mr Kittelmann if it includes the textiles sector.
I believe that everyone agrees with what we are saying.
Parliament adopted the resolution
The Commission has just presented us with a cautiously optimistic theory on the economic and social consequences for Europe of the global financial crisis.
Leaving aside Europe as a whole, and concentrating instead on France, I would actually be even more cautious.
Even a moderate slowing down in growth can have very negative consequences if it occurs in a country that has no room for manoeuvre.
This is the case with France.
It already has record compulsory levies, it no longer has any monetary autonomy following the introduction of the euro, and it cannot, in any case, allow itself the luxury of increasing its budget deficit, which is already the highest in the European Union in terms of percentage of GDP.
These constraints will be added to further by a series of additional costs caused by socialist policies, from the cost of the 35-hour week to that of the massive programme to regulate the situation of illegal immigrants.
This does not even include the costs of the euro resulting from the establishment of the European public authority needed for its operation.
Without returning to the issue of the single currency, on which my feelings are well known, I must stress that the European Union can be useful to us in a crisis if it conducts a vigorous common trade policy to combat dumping, for example in the iron and steel industry or shipbuilding, and to ensure compliance with the Community preference, for example in agriculture.
The EU must also help us to conduct international negotiations aimed at a relative stabilisation of exchange rates, an action that goes hand in hand with a common trade policy.
However, we must not delude ourselves: Europe can only provide us with supplementary aid. The essence of the solution is in the hands of the French themselves.
They must choose between the current negligence which, if it continues, will one day mean that we are controlled by Europe, or an effort of self-discipline which alone will be able to preserve our sovereignty.
Common fisheries policy action plan
The next item is the report (A4-0462/98) by Mr Novo, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the Commission working document 'Improving the implementation of the common fisheries policy: An action plan (SEC(98)0949 - C4-0378/98).
Madam President, Commissioner, ladies and gentlemen, in addition to dealing with the specific proposals of the Commission's action plan, I intended in this report to consider, and often to confirm, political issues involving the whole common fisheries policy.
In fact, it is my understanding that controls cannot or must not be regarded as an isolated political priority. Rather, they must be looked at as one aspect of a set of broader policies that ensure the social and economic sustainability of the sector and of the fishing communities reliant on this sector.
Monitoring is clearly decisive in ensuring the success of the fisheries policy in a situation of declining resources that is affecting a growing number of species.
However, in order for controls to be accepted and effective, it is essential that they be applied correctly, universally, transparently and fairly. This requires, from the start, a simplification of rules and the broad and effective participation of all the social partners, at both state and Community level, in the process of defining these rules.
Furthermore, the need to adjust the fishing effort has to be based on multilateral and systematic scientific research, using adequate financial and human resources, which can identify the true state of the resources. They must also be able to assess independently and reliably the consequences of the various sources of pollution on the state of the oceans.
We must promote stability in the sector, particularly with regard to access to resources. The central issues must therefore be to guarantee the continuation of the exclusive national use of the territorial waters within the twelve-mile limit, and even to consider whether it needs to be extended and to guarantee the continuation of the international fisheries agreements.
The social development of the sector also requires policies establishing general levels of social benefits and welfare entitlements that are identical for all Community fishermen and that guarantee them the foundations for a common legal statute in line with higher standards of living.
The widespread introduction of new technologies is certainly positive, not only in terms of improving the reliability and transparency of the controls, but also in terms of allowing an overall modernisation of infrastructures, thus improving health and safety conditions at work and guaranteeing a higher quality of fisheries products.
However, the effects on increased productivity must be assessed. We must prevent over-fishing as well as the creation of conditions leading to large monopoly enterprise groups that are totally alien to the economic realities of the sector.
For these policies to be implemented in a global and integrated manner and for the controls to therefore be successful, it is essential that, at both state and Community level, fisheries policy has adequate financial support, thereby putting an end to its position as the poor relation of the Community budget.
In this context, the way in which the sector is dealt with in Agenda 2000 does not augur well and this situation must be radically altered.
As for the proposals of the action plan, in essence, responsibility for monitoring naturally lies and will continue to lie with the Member States.
This does not mean that efforts may not be made towards real cooperation in terms of information, without breaking any confidentiality rules. We can also aim to achieve effective equivalence and reliability of the assessment procedures, which are increasingly computerised, and ensure an agreed definition of the basic rules and offences and of the equivalent sanctions.
Inspection procedures must also be established by consensus, with a code of conduct being proposed. In addition, cooperation between administrations must be increased while equivalent vocational training must also be encouraged and the human resources allocated to the controls increased at all levels.
Similarly, it is vital to conclude the procedures allowing proper comparison of fleets and respective productivity by implementing the commitments made by some countries under the multiannual guidance programmes.
At the same time, we must accept that the reduction in the fishing effort cannot be implemented on the sole basis of reducing the number of vessels, but must also involve the voluntary reduction of operation time. These measures should, in any case, be permanently accompanied by adequate and general compensation and by training programmes and aid for retraining.
The report argues in favour of tighter controls on third-country vessels and on the so-called flags of convenience, as regards both access to resources and landing.
In this respect, it calls for compulsory satellite control of these vessels in Community waters and the correction of the imbalance between the controls carried out in Community waters and those carried out in international waters.
Finally, the recourse to greater certification of products landed and marketed in the EU is decisive.
Tighter controls on their origin are necessary and we must take into account the social and environmental conditions of their production methods, the minimum size requirements for the species and the health and hygiene standards required in the EU. Tighter controls on transport from landing to the final point of sale are also required in order to make it possible to reliably ascertain the origin and legal situation of products on the market.
The rapporteur and Parliament now hope that the Commission and the Council will take due note of all the policy guidelines approved today. If followed, these may contribute positively to improving the implementation of the common fisheries policy.
I must thank all my colleagues for their contributions to the drafting of this report and I must particularly thank all the secretariat of the Committee on Fisheries for its diligence in preparing this report.
Madam President, Mr Novo has produced a very interesting report.
It is apposite in a week when we have been talking about control of the finances and the activities of the European Union, that here at the tail end of the session we should be discussing control of one of the most important policies and one of the few common policies we have, namely the common fisheries policy.
The Commission has produced a five-year plan for the common fisheries policy over the next five years.
When my party formed the presidency of the Council last year under the chairmanship of Jack Cunningham and Elliot Morley control and supervision of control was made a high priority.
It is very important because nothing brings the Union into greater disrepute - and we have seen that this week - than to have disputes and allegations of bribery and cheating.
Fishing is an area where a great deal of this goes on.
Indeed, in my constituency only last year a Spanish trawler was arrested and impounded in Greenock for illegal fishing off the coast of Ireland.
No doubt Scottish and Irish vessels have been impounded elsewhere.
All fishermen, irrespective of nationality, are very adept at bending rules to their own advantage and blaming it on the foreigner, blaming it on the Irishman or the Dane or the Spaniard.
This happens throughout the Union and it is important that the Commission and the Member States get together and establish some common rules and some common responsibilities.
Member States must face up to their responsibilities and we in Parliament must play our part by ensuring that sufficient resources are voted into inspection and surveillance.
It is apposite too that Mr Novo is the rapporteur because Portugal has a second-to-none scheme of satellite surveillance which our Committee on Fisheries visited only last year.
I was very impressed when I saw how they carry out surveillance by satellite and then send spotter planes out.
They can take photographs of ships and if they are in the wrong area they can be taken to task and the fishermen can be fined in the courts.
It is a very successful method.
My own government has introduced a designated port scheme which will stop the landing of illegal fish.
This has been a serious problem in the United Kingdom.
The Fish Merchants Association in Aberdeen has lobbied me about this.
It is worried about the impact of illegal fish on price in the North of Scotland.
These are some of the areas which are mentioned in the report.
It is a very good report.
The Commission has a produced a reasonable working document and hopefully together, Parliament's Committee on Fisheries, the Commission and the Council - who must face up to their responsibilities in this - will bring about proper control of the common fisheries policy.
Madam President, the success of the common fisheries policy depends on effective monitoring and strict enforcement.
This applies both to non-EU vessels and to the fleets of Member States.
Some fisheries resources have been badly depleted by over-fishing which threatens the current livelihood of fishermen and of fishing communities, which are often in the poorest peripheral regions of the EU.
Equally important, it threatens their long-term future.
I welcome this report.
I believe the rapporteur is correct to criticise certain Member States for failing to supply adequate data.
It is totally unacceptable that vessels in the Mediterranean are exempt from the obligation to keep logs and declarations of catch in contrast to the requirements placed on vessels in other EU waters.
It is supposed to be a common fisheries policy, therefore common rules and obligations should apply to all equally.
We must improve the methods of monitoring and impose stronger penalties for breaches.
Further cooperation between the Commission and the Member States is needed to achieve an effective implementation of the control of EU fisheries policy, even if the responsibility for the control is on Member States.
This cooperation will not be complete if we exclude the main actors affected by the fisheries policy, namely fishermen, producers' organisations and vessel owners.
Since control measures might harm the industry, we also must support the rapporteur's plea for the issuing of new compensatory training and reconversion measures.
It is also vitally important that Member States should allow access for Community inspectors to their waters, allowing for a complete and more effective cooperation between national and European authorities.
Furthermore, an effective control of the CFP would also be incomplete if no measures are taken in the marketing of sea products.
Size control should also be a 'must' when we consider the design of an effective control policy.
Finally, I should like to make a point in relation to my own country.
The Irish navy has the responsibility of policing some 20 % of EU coastal waters.
Despite the meagre resources at its disposal it does an exceptionally excellent job.
While the EU has been helpful in providing additional resources, more is always necessary.
The reason I underline this point is that the role of the Irish navy is not an Irish one; it is undertaking a European task.
The Commission should provide much more resources because the task that they are doing will certainly improve the lot of fishermen throughout the EU.
Madam President, the Commission action plan on monitoring, if its aims come to fruition, is a positive move towards improving implementation of the common fisheries policy.
I suspect, however, that the enforcement of the CFP, despite repeated efforts, remains ineffective.
I am sure we could all quote examples of that.
It is thus important to stress the need for monitoring to be effective throughout the Community and not just in certain Member States.
Uniform application of monitoring methods and standards of implementation must persist throughout the European Community and the disparities that exist should be brought to an end.
To this end I welcome the recent adoption of a regulation seeking to establish a control system applicable to the CFP emphasising the use of Community inspectors in addition to national inspectors.
The use of new technologies in improving implementation is a step forward but clearly such methods should be financed properly and equally across Member States.
It is little wonder, for instance, that Scottish fishermen get annoyed when they are prevented from accessing support available to fishermen of other Member States.
In my view such inequalities undermine the objectives of the CFP.
I agree strongly with the report where it states that standard penalties for the same offences should be the norm throughout the Community.
The fair and consistent application of controls is important but, again agreeing with the report, the system of controls must be an integral part of all the measures implementing the CFP.
There must be a wider approach to fisheries which includes transparency, cooperation and harmonisation of data and administrative documents.
A fundamental prerequisite for successful implementation is the greater involvement of the fishing industry in the entire process from decision-making to implementation.
This is something we must strive to achieve.
The UK's designated port scheme may have been well-intentioned but it has not been helpful to those ports which have not been designated but which do, in fact, have fish processing activity, which is important to these communities.
Madam President, I am speaking on behalf of and according to the instructions of Mr Souchet, the vice-chairman of the Committee on Fisheries.
The deliberations by Mr Novo and the Committee on Fisheries on the need to improve the implementation of the common fisheries policy have highlighted four main proposals that we fully support.
The first proposal relates to the issue of controls.
These must be fair and new technologies must therefore be used.
However, this issue cannot be considered in isolation or without extensively involving the industry.
The second proposal involves the need for very vigorous international action so that the measures allowing responsible fishing are applied to both third country fishermen and to Community fishermen, so that our fishermen are not penalised.
The third proposal refers to the priority to be given to research, which will prevent dubious decisions being taken that are devoid of scientific basis, such as happened recently with the decisions on drift gillnets.
Finally, the fourth proposal requires a strong political will to ensure that the fisheries sector is no longer the poor relation of the Community budget and that it is finally recognised as a specific asset of the EU countries.
In our opinion, these proposals are therefore excellent and we will vote in favour of this report.
Madam President, ladies and gentlemen, I would firstly like to thank you on behalf of the Commission for this report which shows a significant level of agreement between the Commission and Parliament.
Concentrating on the two specific issues in this report, the Commission agrees with Parliament's idea of the need for overall consistency in the common fisheries policy.
Efforts should be made to control all activities in the fisheries sector and this should be done fairly.
The Commission also agrees with Parliament on the importance of transparency and cooperation, both among Member States and with the Commission.
In addition, this is reflected both in the plan itself as well as in our proposal to amend the control regulation.
Other elements in the report have already been covered in the amendments to the control regulation adopted by the Council in December.
We were able to discuss this in relation to Mr Teverson's report, which you have approved.
It is a matter of strengthening post-landing controls, strengthening cooperation between Member States and the Commission, tightening controls on third country vessels and even using new technology such as satellite controls. Lastly, there is also the matter of harmonising the concepts of infringements and penalties.
This was also debated at that time but at the moment is rather far removed.
Some of the issues addressed in the report are linked to decisions to be made in a different context, as they relate to monitoring fisheries.
I am referring to matters such as European Social Fund allocations for training in the fisheries sector, or controls in international waters, which are, in principle, dealt with by the competent regional fisheries authorities.
The same can be said of the Community financial contribution towards expenditure incurred by the Member States in implementing control systems, as governed by Decision 95/527.
Your report also mentions controls to be carried out before fisheries controls relating to scientific research into the state of resources.
We support this idea and agree with your opinion, although we will address this issue in a different manner.
As for the rest, ladies and gentlemen, we believe it is especially important that the fisheries sector participate in these initiatives in order to increase its level of cooperation and to promote better information.
We have laid the foundations for adopting common parameters which will be useful for measuring the capacity and the size of the Community's fleets. We were also involved in a debate with the Member States and made commitments on a number of questions that centred on a common definition of inspection.
The Commission notes Parliament's comments regarding the content of the list of pilot schemes, which it believes to be biased as it centres too much on certain areas. We will closely examine the possibility of improving the Mediterranean's situation and we will keep an open mind.
Thank you, Mr Oreja.
The debate is closed.
We shall now proceed to the vote.
Parliament adopted the resolution
Fish discards
The next item is the report (A4-0403/98) by Mrs Hardstaff, on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries, on the problem of fish discards.
Madam President, before I start I should like to request that the vote be taken at the beginning of the next part-session in Brussels.
We are down to 38 Members present, and I am sure that some of those Members will have to leave within the next half hour, during the course of this debate.
I should like to feel that a reasonable number of Members have had the opportunity to vote.
Mrs Hardstaff is requesting that the vote be postponed to the next part-session in Brussels.
Parliament agreed to the request
Thank you very much, Madam President.
Fish is the only major food in the European diet which is still hunted rather than farmed.
Our century has seen major technological developments in hunting methods which have led to a massive increase in catches, resulting in a corresponding serious decline in global fish stocks.
Many measures have been introduced worldwide, particularly by the European common fisheries policy, to try to stem and reverse this decline.
Unfortunately, the introduction of quotas and total allowable catches to deal with this problem has brought about a further problem: discarding of over-quota and non-quota fish, which itself kills huge numbers of fish.
Many of these fish are discarded because they are of the wrong species, below the legal size and/or immature and are therefore killed before they have spawned.
It is estimated that between 20 and 40 % of all catches are discarded.
Not all discards damage the ecosystem: some are of species which are not under stress or they provide food for other species.
Nevertheless, there is no doubt that discarding, particularly of immature fish and species already under pressure, is a significant contribution to the depletion of fish stocks.
The fishermen themselves deeply resent having to throw back parts of their catch, which could be sold if the rules did not exist.
We cannot avoid the need to continue to reduce overall fishing effort in the short term.
Technical measures can achieve a great deal but they have to be within the context of a strictly controlled total effort.
Larger mesh sizes and wider introduction of the square mesh cod end and other selected gears which allow undersized fish and non-target species to escape, clearly have a key role to play.
However, careful monitoring of fish-spawning grounds is also necessary and should lead to short-term closures of certain areas.
If a catch includes over 15 % of immature fish, boats should be legally obliged to leave that area.
Further research is required in Europe to identify species most at risk from discarding in our waters; also research into fish behaviour to develop the most appropriate and effective selective gears.
In particular, my report calls for a pilot project and associated research to investigate whether the Norwegian system of banning all discards could assist in preserving stocks of one or more particularly at-risk species.
Such a pilot scheme should involve some flexibility to enable up to 10 % of over-quota good-quality fish to be sold on the market and taken off the following year's quota.
Obviously there should be no deliberate over-fishing but this would encourage fishermen to observe the no-discard rule.
Targeted species of fish should only be landed at designated ports with proper inspection to cut down the amount of illegal over-quota fish being smuggled into the market.
Landed fish unsuitable for human consumption should, whenever economically practical, be used for processing for fishmeal and fish oil, to cut down dependence on industrial fishing.
Member State governments should play their part in cooperating fully with the Commission to ensure fishing grounds under stress within their jurisdiction are closed when necessary and that they are conducting the controls and inspections for which they are responsible thoroughly and effectively.
Fishermen bitterly resent feeling that they are being subjected to very strict controls whilst others from other Member States are allowed to flout the rules with impunity.
Aquaculture has been suggested as a means of providing additional fish, particularly for processing, and thereby reduce pressure on the most popular and at-risk species.
This could also provide employment in areas affected by a reduction in traditional fishing.
There is no one simple solution to this problem of discards.
A multiplicity of related measures is required to make a real impact.
Above all, the fishermen themselves must be fully involved as they are the people who will make whatever strategies are agreed work.
It is important that we improve training so that fishing training is as well organised as agricultural training and education.
If all those catching the fish understand the reasons for the many measures being introduced to conserve the fish, as well as they understand the technicalities of catching them, they will be willing to cooperate in the long-term interest of their industry.
Finally, if overall fishing effort is to be reduced, fewer days will be spent at sea and fewer people will catch fish.
The EU must ensure that funds are available to help those areas very dependent on fishing to adapt and develop alternative employment opportunities.
I believe that a combination of these strategies can lead to a significant reduction in the wasteful discarding of good-quality edible fish.
Madam President, the EPP Group welcomes this initiative particularly because it is the first initiative on discard tabled by the European Union.
It shows that the Union is currently working with other international organisations to deal with the discard problem.
Nevertheless, discard is not only about juvenile catches but is also about the harm done to fish stocks.
The report focuses all its attention on the juvenile problem, but these discards have wider consequences.
In fact they have negative effects on fish stocks, the marketing of non-human-consumption species, technical measures and so on.
That is why, in spite of supporting this report, it is important to remain vigilant on all the initiatives taken by the Commission to deal effectively and in a broader way with the problem.
The main actors in resolving the discards problem are the Member States, as they have to support the European Commissioner if she decides to close fishing grounds within the waters or jurisdiction of their Member States when there is a clear conservation aim in doing so.
The report highlights the need for further studies on discard and its biological, marine and economic consequences.
However, this should only be the first step to deal with it, both at European and international level.
Other measures are mentioned in the report, such as implementing new technical measures, compulsory landing of catches in specific fishing ports and a fixed reference price for non-human-consumption species.
The EPP Group will remain attentive to further proposals from the Commission and, although we do not particularly share the limited approach followed by the rapporteur, we are ready to lend our support on this significant matter.
Madam President, the Commission is pleased to have the opportunity to give its opinion on this own-initiative report by the Committee on Fisheries, and I should like to begin by congratulating the Committee on Fisheries, and particularly Mrs Hardstaff, on drawing up this report.
On the whole, the Commission supports the majority of conclusions and recommendations included in the motion for a resolution, and it is pleased to note that the report underlines the vital importance of increased selectivity of fishing gear.
The report also includes a reference to implementing a ban on discards.
As the members of the Committee on Fisheries are already aware, the Commission does not fully support the idea of a global ban on discards for a number of reasons. However, the new regulation on technical conservation measures, which will enter into force on 1 January 2000, includes a significant number of provisions that could lead to increased selectivity of fishing gear and, as a result, may reduce the need to discard catches.
The Commission notes the suggestion included in the report on investigating the value of banning discards for one or two species as a pilot project.
Once again, Madam President, the Commission should like to thank Parliament for having drawn up this report.

Madam President, I would just like finally to say that we have had a very exhausting week and that a really important point has been made. We have received confirmation from a representative of the Council that the Council will now look after security in Brussels.
That is an important piece of news.
Thank you, Mr Rübig.
The debate is closed.
The vote on the report by Mrs Hardstaff will take place on 28 January 1999 in Brussels.
Adjournment of the session
I declare the session of the European Parliament adjourned.
The sitting was closed at 12.20 p.m.
Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday, 15 January 1999.
Mr President, I appeal to you and the office of President to find some time, if only little, during this part-session of Parliament to commemorate the 30th anniversary of the death of a young European who gave his life for the freedom and dignity of his people and his country.
Many people will have understood that I am referring to Jan Palach who committed suicide in January 1969, turning his body into a human torch in protest against the oppression of his people by national and international communism.
Mr President, the Alleanza Nazionale delegation believes a place should be created amongst the many commemorations and prizes this Parliament promotes, possibly even a place of honour, in memory of a young man from Prague who sacrificed everything in the name of liberty, which is also championed by this Parliament.
As you will appreciate, Mr Schifone, what you have just said has no connection with the agenda and cannot be included in our order of business at the present time.
Mr President, during question time at the December part-session Mr Pérez Royo and I put a question to Mr Van Miert concerning the legality of the aid the Spanish Government intends to award to the electricity industry.
Subsequently, at a meeting of the European Energy Foundation held a few days ago, the Commission Director-General responsible for energy went so far as to criticise so-called political exhibitionism and the fact that certain issues had been brought into the public domain when in his view they should have been dealt with discreetly in the European Commission's offices.
If the Director-General was referring to the public debate Members of this House are entitled to during question time, I must ask you to lodge a very strong protest on my behalf with the European Commission. I object to a senior official of the European Commission voicing the opinion that such issues should not be discussed in the public domain - the precise phrase used was 'in the marketplace' - and that they should instead be discussed discreetly in the offices of the European Commission.
I believe public declarations of this nature, made at a European forum such as the European Energy Foundation, must be criticised. As regards the transparency of the debate held in Parliament during the December part-session, I would ask you again, please, to convey a strong protest on my behalf to the President of the European Commission.
That will be done.
Mr President, can I raise a point of order on the declaration of Commissioner's interests.
You will recall, as a former distinguished member of the Rules Committee, that pressure was put on the Commission some time ago for a declaration of Commissioners' interests.
This was done reluctantly but in the best spirit of Soviet bureaucracy kept secret, available only to the President and the Secretary-General of the Commission.
Following last week's events, it has now been published and what we have is twenty virtually blank pieces of paper, three years out of date, indicating, much to even my surprise, that the Commission are so dull and uninteresting that they have no interests.
Mr Ford, that is not a question we need look at today.
You know perfectly well as a member of the Rules Committee that you have the option of putting questions to the Commission.
Then it can explain the matter to your satisfaction or you can call for changes.
It is not on the agenda today.
Ways towards a sustainable agriculture
The next item is the statement by the Commission on agriculture and the environment - towards sustainable agriculture.
Commissioner Bjerregaard has the floor.
Mr President, Commissioner Fischler and I have today presented a communication to the Commission on the link between agriculture and environmental policy.
The communication comes after long and fruitful cooperation between our departments, and I would like to take this opportunity to express my thanks to Mr Fischler.
The political response to the demand for a better environment is currently reforming the way in which the EU makes policy.
Integration is the watchword of the process that was set in motion by the Amsterdam Treaty, with the help of the conclusions of the Cardiff and Vienna summits, and integration is a process of which this Parliament has also been a keen supporter.
Integration can take us further in areas where we are making no progress with traditional environmental policy.
The relationship between nature and agriculture is a good example of the fact that it has been difficult to achieve the right balance with the traditional instruments.
For too many years now, agricultural policy and environmental policy have each gone their separate ways.
In some places, the consequences have been dramatic.
Pollution of the groundwater with nitrates and pesticides and erosion and impoverishment in some of Europe's regions are partly the consequence of intensive farming.
Other areas are suffering from the marginalisation of agricultural land and depopulation - a development which also has serious consequences for nature and the countryside.
Alongside these trends in agriculture, Europe has adopted some ambitious environmental legislation which reflects its citizens' wish to have a cleaner, healthier and more attractive future.
However, it has also become clear that the developments in agriculture have in fact made it difficult to ensure compliance with the environmental legislation.
Parliament's recent report on the implementation of the nitrates directive was a very good demonstration of this problem.
There is therefore every reason to integrate the environment into agricultural policy, and that is precisely the intention of the Commission's proposal for agricultural reform as part of the Agenda 2000 package.
That was the one which we presented in March last year, as you know.
It is as one of the components of this integration project that the Agriculture Commissioner, Mr Fischler, and I have today presented a communication on agriculture and the environment to the Commission.
The communication aims to demonstrate and stand up for the need to maintain the environmental elements which are included in the Commission's proposal.
Anything else would make the governments' calls for integration sound hollow.
Before I deal with some of the key elements in Agenda 2000, let me stress that a good deal of Community legislation - including some outside traditional agricultural policy - has a bearing on agricultural production.
As I have said, the nitrates directive is a good and well-known example, but there is also EU legislation on pesticides, genetically modified organisms and consumer protection.
Legislation in these three areas is helping to limit the environmental impact of agriculture.
But when we turn to purely agricultural policy and the environment, the Agenda 2000 proposal is a key element.
In brief, a reform is planned which is so green that agricultural policy and environmental policy will increasingly complement one another.
I should like to describe some of the main features.
Firstly, the guaranteed prices for beef and veal, cereals and milk are being reduced.
This price reduction is necessary to create a better balance in the market, but lower product prices are also good for the environment.
This part of the proposal gets to grips with the artificially high prices which for years have been partly to blame for the over-use of sprays, artificial fertiliser and energy.
Secondly, the Commission is proposing that Member States should make the payment of all income support conditional on farmers observing the rules that are required to protect the environment.
This will provide a much greater incentive to implement what are ambitious but necessary EU rules in practice, and in this context I would once again mention the nitrates directive, as well as the environmental protection legislation and legislation on pesticides.
Thirdly, support for particularly environmentally friendly farming methods is being increased as part of the so-called accompanying measures.
This is support for farmers who are willing to make a positive environmental contribution beyond the minimum legal requirements.
This may be organic farming, extensification or reforestation.
In this respect, the proposal is a consolidation of the pioneering schemes introduced at the beginning of the 1990s by what is known as the MacSharry reform.
Fourthly, so-called 'national envelopes' are being established for the livestock sector.
This expression covers a sum of money which the Member States are free to distribute within the sector as they please.
A more environmentally correct distribution might be based on the amount of pasture land a farmer has, rather than providing support in proportion to the number of animals, as is now the case.
If used correctly, these 'envelopes' could help further promote environmentally correct forms of cultivation and reduce the cultivation pressure on sensitive land.
I would stress the fact that it will be up to the Member States, and not the Commission alone, to ensure that this takes place.
Fifthly, it will now be possible for farmers in Natura 2000 areas who have had extra burdens placed on them to share in the aid distributed to less-favoured areas.
This should make it possible to increase the benefits provided by what is a cornerstone in the protection of Europe's environment.
Let me also remind you that last spring I presented and secured the adoption of a strategy for biodiversity in Europe.
This means that by the end of 1999 an action plan will be drawn up on how European agriculture will contribute to safeguarding biodiversity.
Agricultural reform is, of course, a precondition for this measure.
All these building-blocks of a new agricultural policy go a long way towards what a number of environmental NGOs and a large section of the European Parliament have been campaigning for.
It is clear that the Agenda 2000 reform proposal is an unambiguous signal that, from now on, aid will be redirected towards more neutral support for production and more support for the environment.
In future, the common agricultural policy will increasingly reward environmental values and responsible farming.
Farmers who take up the environmental challenge will have a financial advantage compared with the current system.
Agriculture itself, as Mr Fischler has often stressed, has a long-term interest in a redirection of aid.
I expect the outcome of the forthcoming negotiating round of the World Trade Organisation to point in the same direction.
It is a positive development in which there is the great challenge of ensuring that environmental aid does not just become a kind of window-dressing, protecting traditional monetary flows.
But there are also other long-term perspectives in the reform.
My message is that, if it is adopted, the proposal will lead to greater local influence on policy than is the case today.
To a greater extent, agricultural policy will become a matter for our citizens and farmers.
Individual countries, regions and districts will be involved in deciding the requirements that will apply in their areas.
There will of course be conditions to ensure that existing European and national legislation is respected, but with an opportunity for people to take more account of local circumstances than is possible with very centralised solutions.
In fact, this is the principle of subsidiarity in practice.
Environmental organisations, local authorities, water companies and other interested groups will be able to sit down together with farmers and discuss how agriculture and the environment should work together to contribute to sustainable development.
Brussels will continue to draw the outlines, but the citizens will fill them in.
This will of course make considerable demands on both citizens and farmers.
A dialogue will be created covering everyone's interests.
This will give our citizens a great opportunity to influence developments, but they will naturally need to become involved and be willing to accept the responsibility which this brings.
It is important that all the EU countries take up this challenge.
The Commission's proposal, which was put forward in March 1998, has since been discussed in the Agriculture Council together with Mr Fischler.
It is far from being adopted, and it would be wrong to say that all the European agriculture ministers were enthusiastic about the prospect of a greener policy.
As you know, however, at the June summit in Cardiff, the Heads of State and Government called for agriculture to be one of the policy areas which should lead the way and demonstrate how integration should be carried out in practice.
This challenge was renewed and built upon in Vienna, with a request for a report for Helsinki.
That report will contain a timetable for gearing agricultural policy further to the environment and will deal with the question of what indicators can be used to measure the state of the environment.
This is an important question, because it is difficult to pursue environmental goals if the relationship between agricultural production and the state of the environment cannot be assessed in a way on which there is general agreement.
It is of course a precondition for making progress that the agriculture ministers should reach agreement on the reform package.
However, it is not enough to cross our fingers and wait for the outcome.
The environment could easily be forgotten in the final dash for cash.
I see it as a great personal challenge to ensure that that does not happen, which is why Mr Fischler and I have today presented the communication, which states, amongst other things, that intensive agriculture conflicts with the EU's ambitions for the environment and that a further effort must be made if drinking water and biodiversity are to be safeguarded.
The communication also highlights the important role played by organic farming, because it can make a positive contribution to solving these problems.
The agriculture ministers will be held to the instructions given by the Heads of Government in Vienna and at previous summits.
Above all, it will be made clear that a reform without environmental progress is not sustainable, either for the environment or in political terms, for that matter.
Europe's taxpayers deserve and demand an environmental return on the cheque for EUR 40 billion which they donate to the agricultural sector every year.
Like Mr Fischler, I hope that the European Parliament will welcome this initiative and use it to reopen the public debate on agricultural reform and the environment, which is so essential.
The long-term success and acceptance of the reform depend at least as much on a sound environmental profile as on the price of cereals and meat.
Mr President, this Commission initiative must be welcomed.
In the last few years I believe that significant progress has been made in reinforcing the environmental dimension of the Common Agricultural Policy. I also believe that the 1992 reform was a very important point given its establishment of agri-environmental and agri-forestry measures.
This Commission communication is heading in the same direction and will reinforce this aspect.
However, there is one issue which I feel is rather contradictory.
If we analyse these proposals for reforming the Common Agricultural Policy, now being discussed within Agenda 2000, we find that there is only an increase of 5 % in the amounts intended for agri-environmental measures. In other words, this is only a very small increase to reinforce the environmental dimension of the CAP, which to a certain extent is in contradiction with the Commission's current political aim which I support.
I would ask the Commissioner to explain why there is only a 5 % increase in the amounts for agri-environmental measures.

Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, may I point out that Mr Cunha did not put a direct question, but since I do not agree with his last statement I would like to make the following clear. It may be true that expenditure on those environmental measures that are currently summarised under Regulation 20/78 is only rising by a certain amount, but it is also true that this results in a whole range of other, additional expenditure, for instance an extra incentive for extensive beef production.
Finally, it must be emphasised that in future all direct agricultural aid payments will be subject to the observance of good agricultural practice, which de facto also means higher environmental requirements and for which absolutely no provision is made under our existing rules.
Mr President, I must first recognise that progress has been made towards reconciling the needs of the environment with those of agriculture.
Nevertheless, I feel the Commission has shown a certain lack of judgment, in that a distinction should be made between measures designed to encourage good practice and simply meeting minimum standards.
The arrangements now in place mean that failure to meet minimum standards could lead to farmers not receiving aid.
The Commission needs to codify these minimum standards clearly. At present, they are scattered throughout Community legislation.
However, measures designed to create an incentive are better codified, and in future we are likely to see them in the rural development programmes and then in certain sectoral COMs.
For instance, the Commissioner has just mentioned how those who wish to benefit from the ECU 100 extensification premium know they will have to maintain a specific intensity of cattle.
These measures are designed as an incentive to improve the quality of the environment.
I would like the Commission to codify all the standards which will have to be met in order for farmers to qualify for aid.
Member States should not have the latitude to act as they see fit. It seems from the Commission's proposal that it is delegating all its responsibility to the Member States, whereas I feel it is incumbent on the Commission to codify the minimum standards required across the length and breadth of the Community.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I am very grateful to Mr Colino Salamanca for the statements he has made.
But let me clarify the Commission's point of view again.
Firstly, we have to distinguish in the proposals between measures that are obligatory and those that are voluntary, meaning first of all those that are obligatory or voluntary on the part of the farmer.
So the point is that the farmer is guaranteed the same level of direct payments, which correspond to compensatory payments, but that these will be subject to the general requirement of what is called gross compliance, which the Member States are indeed required to impose.
It will no doubt prove possible under the implementing provisions also to coordinate the level of these requirements in such a way as to avoid any bias.
The second aspect is the voluntary payments, which must go beyond normal practice.
That is one of the conditions of eligibility for such payments in the first place.
But here too it is clear that they are a component of the second pillar, namely rural development policy.
After all our proposal is that we must have a rural development policy of this kind for every rural region.
But the proposals also specify that a programme will only be accepted if it definitely incorporates an 'agri-environmental measures' heading.
Seen from that aspect, I believe our proposals to a very large extent satisfy your requirements.
Mr President, Mr Fischler, would you admit that environment-friendly agriculture is still the exception, that intensive farming is still the rule, that price reductions within the intervention system trigger more intensive production?
Secondly, I find it very sensible for you to say that the second pillar should contain an environment-based programme, but the funding is very low.
How do you propose to help the rural areas with this kind of structural programme?
Thirdly, when you, or Mrs Bjerregaard, refer to subsidiarity I wonder how this is to be achieved if we do not have any framework conditions at European level.
That is not subsidiarity, it is giving free rein.
Two small examples: in set-aside land you allow chemical industrial raw materials to be used in farming but you do not allow vegetables to be grown for animal feed.
My other example ...
The President cut the speaker off
Mr President, to simplify matters let me reply to the first part of the question and, as Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf wanted, Mrs Bjerregaard will reply to the second part.
On the first part: Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf, I often agree with you but on this point I do not agree that price reductions, in fact the reduction of guarantee prices, automatically triggers more intensive farming.
We had the opposite experience with the 1992 reform.
If you look at the trend in expenditure on fertilisers, pesticides and so forth between 1992 and 1998 you will find that it fell rather than rose.
So your hypothesis is not correct.
Let me add here that in my comments on subsidiarity there was no suggestion of any kind that people did not need to comply with environmental legislation.
On the contrary, I emphasised very clearly in my speech that one condition for discussing these things at all was compliance with environmental legislation.
As is emphasised in the communication, the positive message - which is also contained in the Agenda 2000 proposals - is that there should be cooperation at local level between people who are close to these problems.
So I think we all agree that environmental legislation should be respected, but also that the people who are close to the problems should sit down together more often and find some sensible solutions.
Mr President, in principle, I am all in favour of decentralisation.
Nevertheless, I was somewhat surprised, to say the least, to hear Commissioner Bjerregaard sing the praises of decentralising environmental policy.
Where the decision-making process in relation to the environment is decentralised, different conditions will naturally obtain in the different countries.
This would distort competition by giving countries with lax environmental policies a competitive advantage.
That is not the right approach for the Union.
No, Mr Olsson, that is definitely not right.
European environmental legislation must be complied with.
That is also why I said in my introduction that I was pleased with Parliament's report on the nitrates directive, and that we have taken specific measures against countries which are failing to comply with the directive.
In my introduction just now, I said that 'agricultural policy will become a matter for our citizens and farmers.
Individual countries, regions and districts will be involved in deciding the requirements that will apply in their areas.
There will of course be conditions to ensure that existing European and national legislation is respected, but with an opportunity for people to take more account of local circumstances than is possible with very centralised solutions.'
I therefore do not believe that there is a great difference between Mr Olsson's views and my own in this area.
Mr President, Commissioners, organic farming is a very good example of sustainable agriculture.
The joint resolution from the European Parliament on organic livestock production questions the Commission and the Council on the technical progress needed to fulfil the Commission's proposal that is currently being examined. As regards the fundamental issue of animal nutrition, the derogation in this proposal that allows 10 % conventional feed to be used is quite sufficient.
With the 25 % recommended by the Council could production really still be called organic, particularly as organic farming must remain a byword for the strictest and most stringent quality standards?
You agree with this, I know for a fact.
Does the Commission believe that an animal fed with 25 % conventional feed can still be described as an 'organic product'?
What is more, the nature of this conventional feed is not specified in any way.
It could include intensively farmed products, whereas the least we could do would be to specify products from regions covered by the agri-environmental measures, from integrated farming or even farming converting to organic methods.
What does ...
The President cut the speaker off
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, the question Mrs Barthet-Mayer has put in fact goes in two directions.
We must draw a very careful distinction here: what is conventional production, what is integrated production and what is organic farming?
They are three different categories.
As you know - and, Mrs Barthet-Mayer, we recently discussed this in Parliament - the Commission proposed Community-wide guidelines that would also protect animal products, so as to establish a common, Europe-wide standard for the definition of organic products.
This proposal has now been on the table for some years and the Council of Agriculture Ministers is currently discussing it in detail - the most recent discussions were at the December Council - but to date it has not managed to reach a unanimous view.
There are a few sensitive aspects involved which, in my view, need further discussion, without accepting any watering down of the core question, namely the definition of what is actually meant by organic products; one specific aspect you addressed in this connection is the use of conventional feed and of feed containing GMOs.
That is a question that is currently being discussed at another level, in connection with the revision of Regulation 220/90, and I believe we must endeavour to take a more balanced look at any measures that can lead to clearer consumer information.
Mr President, could I have an assurance that both Commissioners are united in opposition to the import of beef produced with hormones and also milk produced with BST.

Mr President, Mrs Hardstaff, this is not in fact directly connected with today's subject but I would like to tell you one thing quite clearly: what we will and must do is, as stated in the panels' findings, to adjust our risk assessment to the WTO provisions.
In all the Commission has commissioned eight scientific studies.
We are now awaiting the findings of these studies and I hope we can then adhere to our position, as we have always intended.
Mr President, Mr Fischler, am I right in assuming that in fact you drew up Agenda 2000 in order to make farmers more competitive on the world market and not in order to reduce the consumption of fertilisers and other means of production that farmers urgently need?
That is my first question.
Mrs Bjerregaard's explanation was about the last reason that could be given for why we have to implement the Agenda at all!
Second question: can you tell me what percentage of the aid under Regulation 20/78 the Member States are taking up?
In my region it is 100 %, so it is worth raising this matter.
I would also like you to tell me what you mean in real terms by agricultural practice.
Please do not confuse the concepts of intensive farming and farming appropriate to the location!
Mr President, I believe there is a good deal of similarity between what I have said to Parliament today and the proposal presented by the Commission in Agenda 2000.
The new communications on which Mr Fischler and I have reached agreement, and which it is important to have distributed, point out that there should be an interaction between environmental and agricultural considerations.
Neither of us accept non-compliance with environmental legislation.
We are framing the policy in such a way that it is feasible.
We are both of the confirmed opinion that it is feasible, and that it is possible for us to secure some sensible decisions in the Member States.
It may be that some help will be required before we achieve a constructive outcome, and we also naturally hope that Parliament will enter into this debate, so that we can achieve a result which ensures both sensible agriculture and a sensible environmental policy.
Commissioner, let us presume that your intentions are good and what you have told us is interesting.
Let me remind you that agriculture does not stand alone in the economy. It too operates in the context of a complete environment.
How can our farmers farm ecologically when the industries that supply them and those which are their customers impel them towards anti-ecological practices?
How can they compete against countries from which we import products which are not ecological, not produced by poor farmers but by the worst and most appallingly intensive exploitation of the soil and animals?
And how can they farm ecologically - I know many who do in Greece - when they face enormous problems in marketing their products, marketing which receives no aid under our regulations?
Perhaps, therefore, we should consider these issues in relation to their environment?
Perhaps, instead of talking about ecological farming, we should be talking about an ecological economy?
Mr President, as Mr Fischler said a moment ago, the reform is about more than just organic farming, which accounts for a very small percentage of European agriculture.
Obviously, it is desirable that this percentage should be increased, but we have of course concentrated on many other things.
Let me say this loud and clear: I believe that the citizens of Europe want clean water.
They are not willing to accept a situation in which the water they drink is not clean.
They cannot understand why it should be impossible to formulate a sensible agricultural policy and at the same time to have clean water.
We believe it is possible, and that is why we have put forward these proposals and also why we maintain that the environmental legislation must be observed at the same time that we have sensible agriculture in Europe.
It may be that we have to talk tough with the Americans on occasion, but if that is the case, then that is what we shall do.
I should like to put a question to the Commission. In the context of the search for a natural balance between agricultural production and the needs of the environment, what use does the Commission have in mind for agricultural produce not intended for consumption?
In particular, what future does it see for biomass which could be used to produce renewable energy? I believe this would be a logical use for some of the surplus production of European agriculture.
Mr President, Mr Robles Piquer, on the second part of your question, whether we are also prepared to encourage biomass farming and the production of alternative energy sources, i.e. renewable raw materials, let me reply as follows.
Firstly, our proposals on cereal growing and oilseeds do provide for support for these products. Secondly, under our proposals for rural development, investment in this sector is also eligible for support measures.
Thirdly, we have included an expanded forestry chapter in the rural development proposals, and these forestry support measures will also provide for increased support for wood as a renewable raw material.
Mr President, it is very important that environmental policy is integrated into agricultural policy, and that environmental policy is integrated into all policy in the European Union.
Especially important, where agricultural policy is concerned, is the protection of rivers, seas and lakes, as has been mentioned here.
There has obviously been progress, in that compliance with environmental standards is being made a direct condition of income support, but, on the other hand, it should be clear as day that aid is to be paid only when the regulations are being observed.
But we should be happy to have come this far.
Now the question arises as to how Member States will respond to what is, to my mind at least, a step forward: how shall we monitor it? Will we need a long transition period?
And how should the matter be treated? Should we have recourse, for example, to an agricultural code of practice, to be used as an instrument of comparison in relation to established policy, and only after that grant direct income support?
Mr President, Mrs Myller, first of all there will of course be appropriate controls and here, as always in such matters, we will have a shared responsibility.
That means that in situ checks on farms will primarily be the task of the Member States and the Commission departments will be responsible for ensuring and verifying whether the Member States are indeed adequately fulfilling this obligation.
Moreover, you must not forget that in regard to carrying out and applying agricultural practice and the financing of direct payments we are looking at Guarantee Fund resources, which simply means that all the expenditure is also subject to EAGGF supervision.
That means that if a Member State does not carry out the necessary checks adequately, we can debit that Member State when we carry out the audit.
Mr President, the way we have approached the area of the environment is illustrated very well by the nitrates directive.
When it was clear that the Member States should have implemented the nitrates directive, we simply carried out a study in all the Member States of how far the implementation had progressed.
We published this report, and we instituted legal proceedings against - as far as I recall - 12 Member States which had not implemented the nitrates directive.
I believe that such an approach, whereby we examine the situation in all the Member States, increases our chances of persuading the Member States to implement the legislation.
One point on which I agree entirely with Mrs Myller is that it is of course vital for the credibility of our policy that it is also implemented by the Member States.
Mr President, when I hear Mr Fischler and Mrs Bjerregaard propose a joint strategy here in this Chamber I am always very much on my guard, for in the view of the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection there has been no harmonisation at all in the environmental field over the past five years; quite the reverse!
The legislation of the past five years teems with vague legal concepts, such as the ATO, a high protection level, good agricultural practice, etc. All this has to be transposed into national law and only then, Mr Fischler, when we have a uniform policy line, can you carry out checks.
My question to you, Mrs Bjerregaard, is this: do you intend to define all the vague legal concepts in this area via Ispra or some other instrument?
First of all, may I say to Mr Florenz that I am quite happy to leave the question of a definition and a more detailed explanation of good farming practice to my colleague Mr Fischler.
However, I would like to say that, in view of the many discussions I have had with the Committee on the Environment, we can only welcome the fact that we now have a joint communication on the environment and agriculture.
Had we discussed this issue two or three years ago, I am sure Parliament would not have thought it possible for us to be in a situation where we have a document like Agenda 2000, which contains so much environmental thinking in the area of agricultural policy.
Obviously, there may be areas in which we would like to achieve more or where there are special wishes, but like Mrs Myller, I think we have every reason to be pleased that we have come as far as we have today.
Mr President, I have two questions.
In 1950, 35 % of the total European population was involved in agriculture.
Today this figure is 5 %.
As a result of this reform and due to ageing in the sector, this figure will fall to between 2.5 % and 3 % by 2006.
My first question is: can the environment be protected while the countryside is being abandoned, and why therefore is this reform heading in this direction?
My second question is: how can the protection of the environment be promoted by spending 50 % of the budget on this 5 % of the population, which will shortly be 2.5 %?
In particular, aid for production just encourages producers to use every intensive production method available. This does not protect jobs, quality, the environment or safety.
How can the Commissioner reconcile the policy which he claims to want to implement with the abandonment of the countryside and payments for production?
Moreover ...
The President cut the speaker off
Mr President, Mr Campos, let me first address the question of expenditure in relation to the percentage of the farming population.
To be fair, you would have to compare it with total public expenditure. If you add the national budgets to the Community budget and then deduct the agricultural part, you obtain a percentage of 2 % for 5 % of the population.
I do not think that is really excessive.
Secondly, on jobs in agriculture, there is only one thing I can say to you. The more environment-friendly our farming is, the more jobs that will imply and not the reverse.
So this proposal to incorporate environmental aspects more firmly in the reform is certainly in the interests of agriculture and of jobs.
But there is one thing you must not forget. If we are going to discuss making these additional demands on European agriculture, and in fact considerably higher demands than we make on our overseas competitors, then we must also be prepared to pay for it.
And we also have to stop arguing that agricultural reform must not cost anything!
Mr President, we have talked about implementation of the nitrates directive on a number of occasions already.
In reply to a written question of mine, the Commission said recently that there were no uniform rules for sampling groundwater to check whether the directive was being implemented correctly.
That seems to me a very feeble basis for monitoring legislation.
When is that going to improve?
My second question is this: nitrate in groundwater can come from sources other than animal manure.
It also comes from artificial fertiliser and from factories, sewage treatment plants and so on. How does the Commission intend to differentiate between nitrate in groundwater from these sources and nitrate from animal manures, so that the burden is not placed entirely on agriculture?
Mr President, it is of course not the job of the Commission to determine whether nitrates come from one source or another.
Our job is to monitor whether the Member States are complying with the nitrates directive, which simply means that checks are carried out as to how much nitrate there is in the groundwater.
That is what we are doing.
That is what we are investigating, and we have found that the areas where there have been particular problems in connection with the nitrates directive are also areas with a high concentration of livestock production, whether it be cattle or pigs, although pigs in particular have caused a great many problems.
That is why some countries have had particular difficulties in implementing the nitrates directive.
As I said, however, it is not our job to check whether it comes from one source or another, but we must ensure that the directive is complied with.
Mr President, my question is to both the Commissioners.
Tomorrow we take a vote on a pretty important piece of legislation, Mr Kindermann's report on animal welfare.
I would like to know how the Commission views the situation.
For example, in the United Kingdom, because of animal welfare legislation, the British pig farmer is suffering.
In Sweden it is estimated that environmental legislation in their country puts one Swedish kroner per kilogram onto the price of meat.
How does the Commission see the protection of European agriculture when it comes to imports from countries which do not have the sort of animal welfare legislation that we have in the European Union?
Please, Commissioners, do not use the argument that the consumer will decide.
The consumer decides on price.
I hope I can get a satisfactory answer.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, in regard to animal protection may I point out firstly - and precisely in order to counter the argument about international distortions of competition - that this should play a part during the next WTO round and should be considered during the next agricultural negotiations.
Secondly, let me point out that it is of course self-evident that animal protection provisions must be respected.
We can never accept, either in agricultural stock-breeding or in stock-breeding in general, that the existing laws are infringed.
But what we have also made provision for, especially in relation to encouraging investment in agricultural undertakings, is that if a farmer sets up stock-breeding systems that are particularly kind to animals and invests to that end he will receive greater support than a farmer who is only prepared to observed the minimum standards.
I have seen the report of the Consumers Consultative Committee on the reform of the CAP on the DG XXIV Internet page.
It is a very harsh indictment, expressing the consumers' point of view and in line with the position of the EBCU.
My questions are: how do you react to it and do you plan to do anything to reconcile the two sides, agriculture and consumer demands?
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, I can entirely agree with Mr Fantuzzi here.
I really do find it most regrettable that this report is based in part on statements that are consistent neither with our actual proposals nor with the current state of the discussions.
I invite you to endeavour jointly with us to give the public more objective information, to protect agriculture against wrong and biased accusations.
Mr President, my question is one for Mrs Bjerregaard.
I am, of course, delighted by the cooperation between the two Commissioners on the agriculture/environment problem, but I do wonder about the danger which may emerge as this sector develops in the future, namely the risk of the transfer of pollution.
I believe that biodiversity is vital.
So I begin to ask questions when I see that the Commission, and Mrs Bjerregaard's service in particular, has shown it is in favour of using genetic technology and putting genetically modified organisms on the market before there has been any serious evaluation of their impact on biodiversity.
I should like to know if Mrs Bjerregaard is prepared to reconsider the authorisation that has already been granted to some genetically modified organisms if it later emerges that such authorisation has a negative effect on biodiversity.
Mr President, on the question of genetically modified organisms, I would like to say that the Commission has been very careful not to put itself into a situation where we have to say either that we want them or that we do not want them.
Instead, what we have done initially is to try to ensure that everyone who had a need to know was informed, which we did by implementing labelling of the products at a very early stage.
We then dealt with the second question which was raised, namely the effects of GMOs.
Obviously, we are also aware of the connection with biodiversity.
This means that in the new proposal which is now before Parliament we are very clear on the question of risk analyses.
But we have also dealt with the long-term effects, which is probably what the question was actually about.
We should of course examine what is involved when such products are released into the environment and whether there could be any effects in the long term.
We are watching this very closely, and as the questioner perhaps knows, proposal 90/220 contains some provisions which mean that GMO products will not simply be approved for all time, but will be subject to reassessment, because we cannot rule out gaining some experience of the long-term effects or obtaining some new information.
So, all in all, we are trying to be as careful as we possibly can, and I am also looking forward to the discussion which I will clearly have with Parliament in February.
I should like to thank the Commission for its comments.
That concludes this item.
Defence-related industries
The next item is the report (A4-0482/98) by Mr Titley, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Security and Defence Policy, on the communication from the Commission on implementing European Union strategy on defence-related industries (COM(97)0583 - C4-0223/98).
Mr President, the European industrial, scientific and technological base is essential to the security of the European Union.
It is that base which provides the capacity and capability which makes possible the political and military pillars of the European defence identity as expressed through the CFSP, the WEU and NATO.
That statement is as true today as when I made it in my first report nearly two years ago.
Yet that base continues to get weaker despite the fact that Europe has some outstanding companies.
We have lost 50 % of the jobs in this sector in the last 10 years.
In 1995 the EU imported from the US six times the value of its exports.
In 1985 the ratio was 4: 1.
The reasons for this are set out very clearly in my first report but can be summed up in one statistic: we have 43 defence-related companies and a defence budget of 94.5 billion euros; The US has 14 defence companies and a defence budget of 212 billion euros.
A further 75 % of what we import comes from the USA.
We do not even trade with each other, intra-EU trade being only 4 % or 5 % of procurement.
It is not that we are not aware of the problem.
I have spent the last 3 years attending endless conferences where everyone is agreed on the problem, most people agree on the solution, but very few people seem willing to take the necessary action.
This is one field where rhetoric and action almost never meet.
I often feel, in fact, that all the players involved are cautiously circling each other in an elaborately choreographed 18th century dance when in fact what we need at this moment is a good dose of rock-and-roll.
I am sure that Commissioner Bangemann will be quite happy to lead that rock-and-roll.
Of course, there has been progress.
There has been the establishment of POLARM.
We have had the defence armament section in the Amsterdam Treaty.
We have had the setting up of OCCAR.
We have had declarations by Heads of State saying how important this is.
We had the letter of intent of 6 July by the six defence ministers which was actually a vital step along the way, as indeed was the code of conduct on arms sales.
We have had the WEAG action plan decided last November but action is not always carried through in this section.
Last year there was the announcement of the intention to set up a European aerospace and defence company but nobody can agree how we do it and there is a battle between those who believe there should be heavy state investment and those who believe it should be a private company.
We agreed a long time ago that there should be a single corporate entity for Airbus but this has still not actually been signed.
It has become rather like watching the Becket play Waiting for Godot .
Westland and Agusta helicopters were meant to be merging but they are still wrangling about simple matters of valuation.
British Aerospace and DASA were meant to be merging but could not agree on the basis of the shareholding which is incompatible.
We have had the often proposed but never consummated marriage between Aérospatiale and Dassault.
In fact, in Europe, it takes us three times as long to create a merger as it does in the USA and the end result is smaller.
British Aerospace/Matra has sales of 1.5 billion dollars compared to its main US competitor with sales of 5 billion dollars.
I will say nothing more about the saga of Euro-fighter, the Horizon or the multi-role armoured vehicle.
Compare that little minuet with the rock-and-roll in the United States where, since 1992, there has been a mass of mergers resulting in basically 3 1/2 major companies.
That is why it is essential that we take action now.
We must use all our resources. There should be no institutional wrangling.
There should be no standing on our dignity or on ceremony.
The Commission's recent communication is so important because it shows a willingness to use all the means that we have at our disposal whether they are Community or Member State instruments.
Firstly, companies have to be allowed to get on with it following commercial logic.
Governments should stand back and only use Article 223 where it is absolutely essential.
That is indeed what British Aerospace is doing, which is probably the closest we have got in the industry to a leather-jacketed rocker, in their amalgamation and mergers with companies like Saab and Matra.
The recent merger with GEC/Marconi is a good deal because it is based on the principles of shareholder value and a sound financial footing is important if we are to get value for money for the taxpayer.
It is also important because what we have seen in the US is that mergers have gone along like Noah's ark, two by two.
They have not tried to force too many companies together at one time.
That is why I think the British Aerospace merger with Marconi makes good sense.
Secondly, we now need to follow the Commission action plan and apply the principles of a single market as far as possible.
We should also use the instruments of CFSP in defining a common position on armaments cooperation, although that common position has to be flexible, bearing in mind the needs of this particular industry.
We also need to establish greater clarity in the CFSP and the function of the European defence identity which is why the initiative of the British Prime Minister and the San Malo Agreement are so important.
We need to define exactly what the Petersberg Tasks involve for our military so that industry knows what equipment it needs to be providing.
On procurement, we must move towards a European armament agency, bringing together OCCAR and WEAG in a loose arrangement, if necessary.
There has to be greater coordination here as indeed there has to be on research.
We have to establish that the best deliverer gets the contract.
We should now no longer rely on a juste retour .
Basically, if we do not start rocking the Americans are going to roll all over us.
Having said that, it is not intended that this report should be anti-American.
Rather we need a strong industry if we are to compete with or collaborate with the Americans and if we are to fulfil the security demands of NATO under the European defence identity.
We should be looking to collaborate with the Americans.
This, after all, is a global industry.
European companies are not really European companies any more.
They have investments in the United States and companies like Boeing have investments in Europe.
So let us stop this artificial distinction and build a strong European industry to collaborate with the Americans.
In fact, I know the industry will hate me for saying this, but the logical consequence of the Boeing/McDonnell Douglas merger is that the next step forward should be a link between Airbus and Lockheed Martin.
Then we will have global competition in the aerospace industry.
Mr President, democracy and freedom are worth defending.
If the will to defend them had not existed in Europe and America when it was most needed, we would not be sitting here today.
In Europe, experience has taught us that a feeling of security prevents war and helps bring about the disintegration of powerful dictatorships from within.
Where an adequate system of defence provides security, ideas about freedom can penetrate and break down even the thickest of walls.
The men and women charged with the task of dealing with European defence are entitled to have access to new weapons.
The question we should now be asking ourselves is whether some of those weapons could be developed and manufactured in Europe.
The response of this committee, including myself, is an unconditional 'yes'.
It is essential for Europe to keep ahead, and even to be right at the forefront in certain areas.
If we have something to offer as producers, we shall also be respected as customers.
Otherwise, we are more likely to have to make do with what we are offered, and at the seller's price.
During a long period of peace - something we dare hope may continue - it is natural that we should reduce our defence expenditure.
It is therefore all the more important for us to coordinate our dwindling European defence industry, so that by maintaining its competitiveness it will be capable of furnishing us with the arms we need to defend ourselves adequately. There will also be more likelihood of the United States wishing to exchange its experience and defence materials with us.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, following Mr Titley's very impassioned plea there should really be no need to discuss this report further.
Let me begin by thanking Gary Titley for his report in which he tirelessly addressed and discussed a subject that is most important in both economic and defence and security policy terms.
Economically, we should have no illusions.
The United States of America, which of course always stands up for totally free trade, for totally free economic development, shows enormous interest and activity when it is a question of defending its own industry and securing its position on the world market.
That is particularly true of anything to do with the defence industry, the aircraft industry and so forth.
So unless it is to be naive, Europe must respond to this kind of competition, but without creating new monopoly positions.
But what we have here is in fact global competition, to which we must of course respond.
Secondly, in regard to defence policy, we are currently talking - and for the time being we are merely talking but I hope we will soon be taking concrete steps - about a European defence identity.
We are talking about Europe having to assume certain tasks without always stealing a glance at NATO or in particular the United States to check what they are going to do.
This kind of European defence identity cannot imply full self-sufficiency, yet a minimum of independence for our arms industry, coupled, of course, with cooperation with the Americans, is absolutely necessary.
I hope Gary Titley is right in saying that what is currently happening between British and American undertakings does not prevent the corresponding decisions and mergers from taking place at European level.
On the contrary, perhaps this will even create a pressure for rapidly taking the necessary decisions now to build up a European industry, not against the Americans but as strong partners.
Lastly, let me point out something that is also contained in the report although it is not its main subject. We in the European Parliament should also talk about disarmament when we talk about defence.
The Social Democrats do not believe that all these endeavours to create a European security identity, a European defence industry, conflict with further steps towards disarmament.
That is still on the agenda!
The safest world is a world in which disarmament is writ large, which is why we should not play one aspect off against the other.
Sadly this is a world in which arms are necessary, in which we have to continue to modernise.
We should do so at European level while at the same time fighting for global, world disarmament.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, we are used to Mr Titley's numerous well-prepared reports and speeches on the subject of defence-related industries.
Mr Titley's work as a whole represents a commendable effort by this House to bring the matter to the attention of the European institutions and to call for changes to an inadequate policy on the military equipment of the Member States' armed forces.
I and my group are in total agreement with Mr Titley's report.
However, I am rather pessimistic about just how dynamic a European arms policy would be within a common defence policy, as mentioned in paragraph 3 of the report.
In actual fact I believe that only an effective common defence policy will allow a concerted strategy to be convincingly and properly achieved in the European arms industry.
But in my opinion, it will take many years for common actions to be realised in defence policy.
We are reassured by the protection provided by the Americans in terms of defence, although we regret our subordinate position in foreign affairs.
While this situation continues, I do not envisage there being a strong will, particularly among certain Member States, to develop and genuinely accept an EU strategy on military equipment.
If I may briefly refer to bilateral and multilateral cooperation, for which I do not want to take the credit, these initiatives which often benefit from WEU support must also be praised.
However, they can be sporadic and timid, lacking the comprehensive political will of the EU.
With every year that passes, we in the European Union are falling further behind our American allies in terms of the quality of our military equipment.
This is also true in defence matters.
This is why we are increasingly followers and no longer leaders in world policy.
Mr Titley's report, by drawing the EU's attention to these problems, deserves credit and also, therefore, our full support.
Mr President, the Commission is right to have given priority to developing a European policy on the defence industry.
The European industry is fragmented and is losing the competition war to our American rivals.
Fortunately, the industry itself takes occasional steps in the direction of cooperation, mergers or expansions.
But the legislation has to keep pace with it all.
The Member States made a big mistake in keeping the defence industry out of the single market, at Amsterdam as well.
In seeking to defend their own national industry, our Heads of Government have signed that industry's death warrant.
I hope today's Commission proposals may change this.
But Europeanising the industry also means Europeanising the export control regulations.
Last July's code of conduct was a first small step, and now we need further steps.
My group, the Liberal Group, backs the German Presidency's proposals to have this code of conduct made mandatory as part of the legislation.
The issues here are not just the industry, but the legislation too.
I should also like to thank Mr Titley for giving us so much of his time as we discussed his report, both in the Subcommittee on Security and the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
My compliments to him.
Mr President, as the coordinator of the Socialist Group as well, Mr Titley has an important contribution to make to the work of the Committee on Foreign Affairs.
However, specifically in relation to armament issues, I think it would be better if his passion and, I would say, fanaticism were to give way to a greater sense of reality and cool-headedness.
For I believe it would be a mistake for the European Union to become involved, so to speak, in a frenzy of competition with the United States over arms industry issues when the European Union still has no principles and basic mechanisms for its foreign policy.
When we see that over major issues, as for example the recent attack on Iraq, some countries align themselves with the Americans, other countries pretend an ostrich-like blindness, and others still make critical comments, how and upon what are we to base such an armaments policy?
I think we are moving into dangerous territory.
The important thing would be to establish the principles and fundamentals of our foreign policy and only then to look at economic and similar aspects related to military equipment for defence.
Of course, I too wish to stress that Mr Titley's report contains important observations which we will support despite our primary overall position, such as the issue of continuing the Konver programme, such as the subject of measures against anti-personnel mines, and such as the subject of a weapons export code which, we fear, will remain no more than a general principle.
And we know very well that the European Union countries persist in the iniquity of exporting the weapons they manufacture to various regimes around Europe, even the most odious and bloodthirsty among them.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, have you forgotten?
We are living in a post-cold war era.
Europe is surrounded only by friends.
This is an age of peace.
It is the age of disarmament.
It is the arms industry that is not prepared to adapt to the new criteria of an age of disarmament and that is sounding the alarm.
It is calling for industrial mergers that would not be approved in the civil sector.
It is calling for subsidies, for political support for arms exports; it is calling for a more flexible policy on cartels.
What forces us to give in to these demands when we know that it would be senseless to do so, when we know that this will not solve the global problems facing mankind, the problems of unemployment and poverty, the problems of climate change?
Do not forget that we created Konver to replace rather than supplement rearmament.
That is why the Greens reject this report.
Mr President, I must add my voice to the criticisms we have heard here today of this report and the Commission communication.
There are too many arms in the world, nuclear weapons must be banned outright and conventional weapons must be drastically reduced.
There is too much selling of arms to unstable areas, whether legal or not, and it merely adds to the level of violence and insecurity in the world.
The codes of conduct are inadequate and poorly enforced.
If you are asking for a European policy, then we say yes to a European foreign policy and a European security policy which pursues the above priority objectives.
We want arms where they are absolutely essential.
The only thing to which I can give my unreserved support, and this is my personal view, is that the matter should be coordinated within a common European area.
For the rest, I have other priorities.
I should like to see a common policy of arms reduction.
I should like to see our own defence industry converted into an industry which pursues peaceful objectives.
I should like to see as few people as possible dependent on the defence industry for their livelihoods.
I want legally binding export controls for arms at European level.
I shall certainly endorse the call for the Council to submit an annual consolidated report on arms exports to Parliament so that we can check on how the codes of conduct are being implemented.
In the meantime, there seems to be very little of the European spirit behind the restructuring operations currently under way.
Mr President, the European Commission wants to implement a European strategy on defence-related industries.
Good idea, it is never too late to do something good like this!
The Titley report wants Europe's security and defence identity to be asserted - I am with him up to this point - but he goes on to say that this should be within NATO, which I find very disappointing.

As sceptical as I am, in its time, the Soviet monster was reason enough, in my eyes, to justify the fact that Europe should forget all conflicts of interest that pitted it against the United States in order to present a united front against a common threat.
Since then, as the European Union has developed, such points of conflict have only become more apparent.
Today, nothing short of an attack by extra-terrestrial monsters could make me forget that Europe is the United States' main competitor and that the United States will not rest until they have thwarted our expansion.
Once again, a free Europe cannot thrive without saying 'no' to NATO.
Mr President, I share the view that the Titley report is an important one, and it comes at a significant time.
It is very much in line with convictions which many of us hold and which we reaffirm, because controlling arms production and exports, indeed raising this issue, is already a way of preventing policy being made by weapons and those who use them, which is exactly what we do not want.
So it is an important report, and for three reasons in particular. First, because it evaluates Europe's defence industry in terms of forming European groups and competing with others, especially the United States industry, supporting scientific research and cutting-edge technology and, finally, in parallel, establishing coordination between the Member States to offer a frame of reference.
Secondly, because talking about the defence industry is a direct reminder of the need to get the common foreign and security policy off the ground, which is essential to the European Union's international credibility - and here I believe coordination with the applicant countries in the enlargement process is important too.
Thirdly, because I think it is right to highlight the fact that we are establishing a code of conduct for arms exports. This code governs a very sensitive area, introduces morality to it, makes it transparent and specifically prevents arms exports being in contradiction with European Union policy.
It is significant that the German Presidency recently stated its intention of making the code of conduct more legally binding. That is the right road.
Finally, I think it is right to mention that the Titley report contains a small paragraph, which we should bear in mind, on the ratification of the Ottawa Treaty on Anti-Personnel Mines by all the Member States.
So all things considered, I think this is an important report.
Mr President, I would have preferred to see this important report discussed primarily in terms of security policy rather than economic policy aspects, for it represents a major step forwards towards achieving a Common Foreign and Security Policy, and surely the political need for that should gradually become undisputed.
Unfortunately perhaps, that requires an arms and arms procurement policy coordinated at European level.
Why?
Firstly, I am convinced that it is important for Europe to retain some independence in providing itself with military assets.
What I regard as important is not so much economic competition but a policy that is independent of the United States.
Secondly, it is also quite crucial for us to reduce our existing surplus capacity in the arms industry only on a basis of coordination, thereby also preventing financial resources from being wrongly allocated to arms contracts that are awarded under the heading of 'we want to protect jobs by creating more employment'.
We are all familiar with examples of this kind in our own home countries.
I also believe it is important that we consistently include the Central and Eastern European countries.
They are facing the biggest problems here and I believe, especially in view of EU and also NATO enlargement, that it is important that we include them here. I regret - here I agree with the direction taken in the report - that the Konver programme is not being continued.
We have to demand that it is!
In the end it is not a question of markets.
The arms industry is not a question of markets and I believe that security policy is the decisive aspect, which is why it is important that we coordinate the arms industry, arms procurement, on a European basis in the interests of the Common Foreign and Security Policy.
Mr President, ladies and gentlemen, following on from its 1996 communication, in 1997 the Commission put forward an action plan for defence-related industries.
It refuses to make allowance for the specific nature of this sector, particularly in terms of the close link between defence and sovereignty, and is determined to apply the principle of free competition for the sake of competitiveness.
It is even going one step further by opening the way for a European armaments policy within the framework of a European security and defence identity.
These guiding principles, approved by the report from the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Security and Defence Policy, are reflected in the restructuring policies that have been implemented in the Member States.
Such restructuring, in the form of merger-acquisition operations at a global level, is based more on financial grounds than purely industrial ones and has serious economic, social and regional consequences.
For example, the French Government is pressing ahead with the restructuring and privatisation of the armaments industries, jeopardising more than 50 000 jobs.
Being active supporters of peace and disarmament, the French Members of my group support cutting expenditure on armaments, particularly on nuclear weapons.
We also suggest that an international conference on reducing the arms trade be organised, which could lead to an international convention.
But at the same time, we are against the restructuring and privatisation that cost so many jobs.
Currently, only 5 % of France's requirements are met by state enterprises and munitions plants.
This is why we believe that the arms we need to defend ourselves should be provided by national enterprises, despite the fact that the Commission thinks that the rules governing public procurement should be applied to military equipment.
The industrial activity generated could also go hand in hand with strengthened cooperation at European level, but without giving up all our advantages, technology and know-how to achieve this.
Such cooperation will only be effective if it is complemented by the establishment of a genuine Community preference for arms purchases, so we can stand up to a dominant America that has cornered 50 % of the world market.
This approach is further justified by the fact that 75 % of major conventional weapons bought by European countries come from the United States.
We also need to begin, and continue with, the process of diversifying and reorientating some military activities to the civilian sphere, particularly the aeronautical, space and electronic industries.
As the CGT, France's national state workers' union, stressed, the engineering and technical staff of these armaments plants have industrial skills and know-how and use technologies that could quite easily be used for civilian purposes.
Such diversification will only be truly effective if social measures are also introduced, such as reduced working time and improved training, in order to safeguard employment and keep sites operational in places where economic and social life is almost exclusively dependent on the armaments industry.
Mr President, the overarching goal of any security policy is global disarmament.
This presupposes a scaling-down of both the manufacture and sale of arms.
The EU should take the lead on disarmament and limiting the arms trade.
This should be a constant element in any discussion on the European defence industry.
Although the international arms trade is a global problem, the Member States of the Union together represent the second most important player in the international arms market and therefore have a particular responsibility.
Mr Titley has certainly done an excellent job, but I cannot agree with him when he says, in paragraph 3, that 'a European arms policy is an essential element in... the establishment of a European security and defence identity within NATO'.
Sweden is a neutral and non-aligned country; it does not belong to NATO and will not be involved in a common defence.
Moreover, I do not believe that it is appropriate to create an institution to deal with arms production before any decision has been taken on a common defence.
As regards Article 223 of the EC Treaty, in my view armaments cannot be regarded in the same light as other goods and traded freely; on the contrary, they should be subject to special rules.
The EU should play an active role, not in making it easier for the arms industry to produce and export weapons, but in tightening up the rules so as to limit the sale and export of armaments.
Mr President, fortunately we are living at a time when there is far less likelihood of an armed attack against our countries and more scope for Europe to continue its policy of disarmament and détente.
However, such a perspective is entirely missing from Mr Titley's report.
Instead, it is all about building a common defence and devising a common code of conduct for the arms industry and exports.
A report of this kind should be seeking to formulate a strategy for turning a military capability into a civil one.
If the EU adopts a more active and aggressive approach to the export of arms, this will also serve to aggravate conflict situations where they occur in the world.
I also disagree with paragraph 2, where it is stated that European research and technology policy should begin to be used for military purposes.
On the contrary, we should be redirecting the enormous resources squandered on military research into the civil sector, where they will at least be of some benefit to the human race.
Furthermore, the report does not adequately take account of the fact that some EU Member States do not belong to NATO or the WEU.
Nevertheless, the rapporteur would like these structures to be included in the Western European Union and in cooperation links with NATO.
I am also unhappy that, as we can see, extending NATO to include the countries of Central and Eastern Europe is having the effect of encouraging them to energetically rebuild their defence capabilities, which only leads to more countries in turn equipping themselves with new weapons systems.
As a result, tension is likely to increase in Europe rather than the reverse - even if some arms manufacturers are made happy in the process.
I agree that there should be an international code of conduct to limit arms exports, but this proposal goes much further than that.
I am therefore going to vote against what is, for the most part, a very reactionary report.
Mr President, first let me thank Mr Titley, and not just for the fact that in terms of substance his report follows the lines proposed by the Commission but also for his realism and for the courage that is indeed required in order to deal realistically such a difficult subject.
That is why I want to begin with a very simple statement, before Mr Sjöstedt leaves.
This is what we so often see in debates: a Member tells us something or other and then leaves.
He never listens to what the others have to say.
Applause
Let me begin with a very simple statement.
I do not believe there is much dispute in the European Parliament about the need for a Common Security and Defence Policy.
A Common Security and Defence Policy, as its name suggests, is not some kind of policy of aggression but reflects the need in a world in which, unfortunately, we cannot guarantee security by peaceful methods alone, to build up a system that shows the public that we are able to defend ourselves.
That is why, even in a neutral country such as Sweden, there is no question at all about having a national defence system of its own.
Mr Sjöstedt, if in relative terms the European Union were to export as many weapons as Sweden, we would have to increase our exports considerably.
The reason why NATO adopts a different approach to Sweden than to Latvia, Estonia and Lithuania is partly because Sweden was never part of the Soviet Union.
So we should begin by stating quite soberly that we do need to defend ourselves.
That is my first point.
The second is that if that need exists and if it will take some time before we can achieve a common security policy - which is not easy politically - then, if it is going to take us another five or ten years to achieve that common security policy and if when we have finally achieved it we no longer have a common arms policy, we will face the problem that although we have a common security policy we have no means of producing weapons ourselves.
Anyone who does not understand that is beyond help!
That is why the Commission has taken the initiative of telling Parliament and the Member States that we have to do something.
For one thing is clear: our industrial policy approach in this area has been purely national to date.
That will not get us any further.
The complaints that have been made here, by Mrs Elmalan too, I believe, that we are constantly losing ground to American exports to the European Union, are true!
The reason is simply that the European industry is too widely dispersed among national undertakings, so that it does not achieve the same overall market penetration as some American undertakings.
We should just look at the order of magnitude. If all the companies that produce arms in Europe joined forces, merged, they would still not be as big as the largest American undertaking operating in this area.
That is also a question of industrial policy.
The answer lies not just with the Commission, with the European Parliament and the European Union, it also lies with the Member States.
All the Member States have said they are aware of the need to restructure the industry.
The same applies to the Airbus.
Just recently the six countries cooperating on the Airbus came together again.
The problem there is quite simple.
Each country begins by defending its own interests, and sometimes its own policy.
The reason France finds it more difficult to privatise Aérospatiale is not because Aérospatiale does not want this but because the current French Government has more problems with this than a different government would have had.
The reason two UK firms have now merged is partly because if this aviation merger takes place, a company that has more influence can of course make more demands.
So we must realise that a kind of power struggle is taking place here.
It would be naive to disregard that.
At the same time all these trends show that the industry and the Member States have realised that something has to be done here.
I consider Mr Titley's report on this very difficult question most encouraging - it is easy enough for some people, including Mr Frischenschlager, to take the position that the right method is in fact to disarm.
The European Union would certainly be the first to accept that if we could make sure it applied worldwide.
Sadly, that is not an option.
That is why we have to take a different road.
We have proposed an action plan that quite clearly states what we can do.
I can assure you that the Commission will propose and implement all the necessary aspects of this action plan this year.
Standardisation is the first aspect.
On public contracts: what Mrs Elmalan said on the subject is the usual reflex in some EU Member States; when a problem arises, people take refuge in protectionism and in a European quota.
You could call it agricultural policy transposed to the arms industry.
But that is the very last thing we should do.
That would not get us any further at all.
So we must muster the strength to create competitive structures.
That means: common standards, joint invitations to tender, for the European arms industry can only become competitive if it issues joint invitations to tender and has common rules on the internal arms trade and on arms exports.
The European Court of Justice has on several occasions ruled that arms exports also lie within the Community's sphere of competence.
The Commission will do all it can to make progress in this area, for if we do not act now, we cannot complain five years hence that we cannot even ensure our own defence any more.
I believe we should follow a good European tradition here. We should be able to produce for ourselves what we need for our own defence.
That is precisely the Commission's aim and I am glad Mr Titley also sees it that way and supports it.
The Commissioner has commented on the fact that Sweden exports arms and the manner in which it does so.
I agree with him that this is both irresponsible and a good example of how it should not be done.
Take for example the export of arms to Indonesia, or the present extremely aggressive techniques being used to sell fighter aircraft. I too think that such actions are wrong.
Nevertheless, instead of having to witness the same mistakes at EU level, I should like to reduce the likelihood of that happening.
The debate is closed.
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9 a.m.
Environment, security and foreign affairs
The next item is the report (A4-0005/99) by Mrs Theorin, on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Security and Defence Policy, on the environment, security and foreign policy.
Mr President, security policy has undergone many changes.
The cold war has ended, and a major war in Europe would seem impossible.
The conflicts which we see around us are the result of ethnic, religious and social differences.
At the same time, new threats are emerging in the form of massive displacement of refugees, terrorism, international crime and, no less importantly, environmental and natural disasters.
Bullets and gunpowder, however, are not the way to resolve such conflicts.
A number of environmental disasters have brought the human race new problems, such as the recurrent flooding in Europe, the dam disaster in Spain and, most recently, the widespread landslides in Central America.
It is clear that there have not been sufficient resources to detect or prevent such disasters.
Since environmental threats do not respect national boundaries, what is required is international cooperation.
There is a growing international awareness of the extent of environmental problems, as illustrated by the UN follow-up conferences on water, desertification, the environment and development, and climate change.
Environmental problems can lead to such serious difficulties that they endanger the security of both individuals and countries.
Fresh water is a very unevenly distributed natural resource.
Fewer than ten countries possess 60 % of the total fresh water resources on earth, and several countries in Europe are dependent on water imports.
In future conflicts, attacks on fresh water may not simply be an end in themselves, but may also be the cause of conflict.
An estimated 300 rivers, lakes and sources of groundwater are located in international border areas.
In the Middle East, nine of the 14 countries have a shortage of water resources.
Local and regional ecological problems can have serious implications for international relations, for example limited water resources or the large-scale displacement of environmental refugees.
The number of environmental refugees has now reached 25 million, compared with 22 million 'traditional' refugees.
By the year 2010, it is estimated that the number of environmental refugees will have doubled.
These new causes of conflict must be reflected in foreign, defence and security policy and the way in which nations establish and maintain peace and security.
We need to mobilise resources to meet the environmental challenge.
A much greater effort is required, but our means and resources are strictly limited.
At the same time, the change in the security situation has resulted in détente and disarmament.
The freeing-up of military resources has given the armed forces a unique opportunity and plenty of capacity to deal with the increasing number of environmental problems.
The armed forces have a highly efficient organisation and extensive technical resources which could be used for the enhancement of the environment without incurring any significant costs.
Prevention of environmental crises requires infrastructure, organisation and increased resources.
These are to be found within the armed forces, although capability may certainly vary from one country to another. In the main, however, they can supply qualified personnel, technologies, advanced technological resources, organisational capacity and military methods of research and development.
Military personnel are well equipped to intervene in the event of disasters and are trained to carry out missions under extreme conditions.
Military activity is also responsible for widespread environmental destruction.
Destroying the environment has been an established method of waging war since ancient times.
War is also far and away the most serious threat to the environment.
The military is responsible for emissions of several gases affecting the climate, fossil fuels, freons, nitrogen oxides and sulphur dioxide.
Nuclear and chemical weapons and landmines are some of the most obvious types of armament that cause extensive damage to the environment, even in peacetime.
The committee held a public hearing to find out more about the 'non-lethal' weapons and HAARP, the High Frequency Active Auroral Research Project.
However, I very much regret that the USA did not send representatives to the hearing or use the opportunity to comment on the material submitted.
There have been two public hearings to try to shed more light on the complex technical and legal aspects of the 'non-lethal' weapons and HAARP.
We have also put forward proposals relating to the economic and practical implications of a training programme for environmental defence troops.
My original proposals were dealt with under the Hughes procedure, and the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection has looked into the environmental aspects very carefully.
Against this more detailed background, I am now presenting this resolution on the environment, security and foreign policy, which makes a series of proposals for measures to be carried out both at EU and national level.
The resolution recommends that the Member States should seek to utilise military-related resources for environmental protection through the setting-up of a training programme for environmental defence troops with a view to establishing a coordinated European environmental brigade, listing their environmental needs and the military resources available, and exploiting these resources in their national environmental planning while also putting them at the disposal of the United Nations and the European Union in the event of an environmental disaster, or under the Partnership for Peace.
Furthermore, the armed forces should comply with specific environmental rules and make good past damage to the environment caused by their own actions.
Civil environmental legislation should be applied to all military activities.
We call on the Commission to present to the Council and Parliament - as foreseen by the Amsterdam Treaty - a common strategy which brings together the common foreign and security policy and the EU's policies on trade, aid, development and the environment.
It is noted in the resolution that preventive environmental measures are an important instrument of security policy, and the Member States are urged to define environmental and health objectives as part of their long-term defence and security assessments.
The resolution also addresses the problem of the uncontrolled unprofessional storage and dumping of nuclear submarines and surface vessels, as well as their radioactive fuel and leaking nuclear reactors.
The Commission is urged to conduct an in-depth study of security-related threats to the environment in Europe and to draw up a green paper on military activities affecting the environment.
The report also examines the legal aspects of military activities and calls upon the European Union to seek to have the new 'non-lethal' weapons technology included in and regulated by the international conventions.
So long as nuclear weapons exist, there is a danger of them being used in error.
That danger could soon be considerably reduced if the nuclear powers were to implement the six proposals of the Canberra Commission.
Let me conclude by saying that almost every day we receive reports of environmental disasters which could be prevented if we used our available resources sensibly.
The resources in question belong to the armed forces, who could be allowed to continue to operate them.
All that is lacking is political will.
Mr President, the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection has considered this report and delivered an opinion about which I should like to make a few brief comments.
First of all, I am pleased to say that we agree with the background information provided by Mrs Theorin here in the House.
However, I should like to conclude my intervention by touching on one or two issues which we view in a different light.
It is quite obvious that nowadays there is no direct military threat to Europe's security.
However, there are other bigger dangers, such as environmental devastation, shortages of fresh water, desertification, climate change, accidents in chemical and nuclear power plants and so on.
It is therefore vital that we revise our ideas about security and develop them to include environmental threats, and on the whole, the report does just that.
It is a very good sign that we are applying normal civil environmental criteria to military activities - this is a necessary development in the present situation.
Tackling the problem posed by earlier nuclear weapons is a major step in this respect.
As to how this would be done, the report proposes that the armed forces should be 'trained' to enable them to cope with environmental problems.
That would certainly be a practicable solution, but the Environment Committee would like to make the point that if substantial resources continue to be allocated to the military, which is certainly the case today, some of those resources should be switched from military defence to the environmental sector, for example rescue and disaster relief services, the decontamination of land and water, and preventive measures to safeguard the environment.
We believe that this is more important than the creation of a special environmental brigade. It is also an idea which could be put into practice.
Mr President, I hope colleagues are aware of the importance and significance of this report.
I refer not just to the quality of Mrs Theorin's work, for which I congratulate her, but the fact that this report was produced by the Committee on Foreign Affairs, Security and Defence Policy.
It is a sign that Parliament has recognised that the end of the Cold War has brought with it an entirely new concept of security and that environmental security is crucial to future peace and prosperity.
There is no doubt that the scarcity and degradation of environmental resources will lead in the future to conflict and we have to use all the resources available to prevent that happening.
If I have a criticism of the report as it has finally emerged, it is that the way it was amended by both the Foreign Affairs Committee and the Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection has meant that we have tended to throw everything in including the kitchen sink.
That is a mistake.
We ought to focus on the basic points.
What is important to most people is the air they breathe, the food they eat and the water they drink - indeed, the water which helps to grow the food they eat.
I would like to concentrate on that one question of water.
It is perhaps the most important security challenge facing us in the next century.
For example, if we look at the Caspian Sea region, we find that it has tremendous oil potential leading potentially to great prosperity.
But it is also a disaster waiting to happen, specifically in the republics of Central Asia.
We all know the horrific tale of the Aral Sea.
Equally, there are other conflicts as a result of both the Soviet system which wasted water and the collapse of the system which has led to chaos in terms of distribution of water supply.